HARARE ,   April   18   ( Xinhua )   --   As   Zimbabwe   is   celebrating   its   Independence   Day   on   Tuesday ,   experts   have   praised   China   for   having   been   the   African   country ' s   all - weather   friend   for   more   than   four   decades . 
 
 After   standing   firmly   with   Zimbabwe   in   its   struggle   for   national   independence   and   liberation ,   China   has   been   playing   an   important   role   in   the   country ' s   economic   transformation   by   investing   in   its   key   economic   pillars   such   as   mining ,   agriculture   and   infrastructure ,   said   Christopher   Mutsvangwa ,   secretary   for   information   and   publicity   for   Zimbabwe ' s   ruling   Zimbabwe   African   National   Union   party . 
 
 He   said   Chinese   modernization   has   created   opportunities   for   African   countries   including   Zimbabwe . 
 
 " This   is   probably   the   most   exciting   time   just   like   in   the   1960s   and   1970s   when   China ' s   arrival   gave   an   option   to   the   liberation   movements   to   fight   for   their   freedom , "   Mutsvangwa   told   Xinhua ,   adding   that   Zimbabwe ' s   victory   against   colonial   forces   would   have   been   unthinkable   without   Chinese   support . 
 
 " Now   this   has   moved   into   the   economic   era   where   the   world   markets   have   become   flat   so   that   if   you   are   not   happy   with   the   price   in   New   York   you   can   always   try   Shanghai , "   he   said . 
 
 Mutsvangwa   further   said   through   Chinese   investment   in   infrastructure ,   Zimbabwe   will   be   transformed   into   a   regional   trade   hub . 
 
 For   example ,   the   Chinese - funded   expansion   of   Zimbabwe ' s   largest   airport   --   the   Robert   Gabriel   Mugabe   International   Airport   --   is   due   for   completion   in   2023 .   The   upgrade   will   allow   the   airport   to   grow   its   passenger   handling   capacity   to   about   6   million   a   year   from   the   current   2.5   million . 
 
 Hopewell   Mupanganyama ,   chairman   for   the   youth   desk   in   the   Ministry   of   Foreign   Affairs   and   International   Trade ,   praised   China   for   standing   with   African   countries   in   their   quest   for   national   independence   and   liberation . 
 
 " Around   the   1970s ,   though   China   was   classified   to   be   a   poor   country   of   Asia   in   terms   of   development , "   it   " made   sure "   that   it   assisted   " Africa   to   dismantle   colonialism , "   Mupanganyama   said ,   adding   that   China   now   once   again   stands   at   the   forefront   of   transforming   African   economies   through   investment   and   trade . 
 
 Over   the   years ,   China   and   Zimbabwe   have   kept   boosting   economic   and   trade   ties .   Trade   between   the   two   countries   surged   nearly   30   percent   year - on - year   to   a   record   high   of   2.43   billion   U . S .   dollars   in   2022 ,   the   Chinese   Embassy   in   Zimbabwe   said .